URL: https://news.nuance.com/2024-03-08-Providence-and-Microsoft-Enable-AI-Innovation-at-Scale-to-Improve-the-Future-of-Care

=== TRANSCRIPT CONTENT ===

No transcript found.

=== PAGE PARAGRAPHS CONTENT ===

Providence leverages Microsoft Cloud for Healthcare as a standard platform for developing and delivering AI-powered applications to improve interoperability, generate clinical and research insights, and improve care delivery, costs, and outcomes

BURLINGTON, Mass., March 8, 2024 /PRNewswire/ -- Nuance Communications, Inc., a Microsoft Company, and Providence, a not-for-profit health system serving the Western U.S., have announced that the organizations are working to accelerate AI innovation at scale, propel in-house solutions development, advance clinical research and spur further collaborations between health systems and healthcare IT vendors.

Through its long-standing collaboration with Nuance and Microsoft, Providence achieved success in migrating solutions to the cloud at scale and accelerating development and adoption of generative AI-powered applications to help improve care quality and access and reduce physicians' administrative workloads. Providence also has widely deployed Nuance's conversational, ambient, and generative AI solutions including the Nuance Dragon Ambient eXperience™ (DAX™) and Dragon Medical One, and the largest implementation of the Nuance PowerScribe radiology reporting solution in the United States.

"Microsoft and Nuance's unparalleled expertise, depth of AI applications, and scale enables us to uplevel our innovation, with each organization bringing tremendous value to the partnership," said BJ Moore, Executive Vice President and CIO at Providence. "Our expanded collaboration enables us to rapidly scale and increase the capabilities of many of our existing solutions while creating more personalized and satisfied experiences for patients and providers alike."

Through its continued collaboration with Nuance and Microsoft, Providence will focus on five key areas:

"This highly productive collaboration between Microsoft, Nuance, and Providence exemplifies how new, innovative AI applications paired with deep healthcare expertise and the scale of the Azure cloud are transforming healthcare delivery," Robert Dahdah, CVP, Global Health and Life Sciences, Microsoft. "We are accelerating the development and adoption of AI solutions in healthcare by leveraging the security, scale, and reliability of the Microsoft Cloud for Healthcare and incorporating previously siloed data streams into state-of-the-art large language models and generative AI that can offer vital insights and recommendations to improve operational efficiency and care outcomes."

The Nuance and Microsoft healthcare solutions are built on a foundation of trust and Microsoft's Responsible AI principles. These innovations are making it easier for healthcare organizations to create connected experiences at every point of care, provide tools that foster collaboration, empower the healthcare workforce, and unlock the value from clinical and operational data using data standards that are important to the healthcare industry. For more information about Microsoft, visit us during HIMSS 2024 in Orlando, FL at booth #3161.

About Providence
Providence is a not-for-profit Catholic health system and one of the nation's largest health systems, comprising a diverse family of organizations and driven by a belief that health is a human right. With 51 hospitals, over 1,000 physician clinics, senior services, supportive housing, and many other health and educational services, the health system and its partners employ more than 120,000 caregivers serving communities across seven states – Alaska, California, Montana, New Mexico, Oregon, Texas, and Washington, with system offices in Renton, Wash., and Irvine, Calif. Learn about our vision of health for a better world at Providence.org.

About Nuance Communications
Nuance Communications is a technology pioneer with market leadership in conversational, ambient, and generative AI. A full-service partner trusted by 77 percent of U.S. hospitals and more than 75 percent of the Fortune 100 companies worldwide, Nuance creates intuitive solutions that amplify people's ability to help others. Nuance is a Microsoft company.

Trademark reference: Nuance and the Nuance logo are registered trademarks or trademarks of Nuance Communications, Inc. or its affiliates in the United States and/or other countries. All other trademarks referenced herein are the property of their respective owners.

Media Contacts:

Providence
Bryan Kawasaki
Tel : 760-684-0822
Email : bryan.kawasaki@providence.org

Nuance Communications
Caitlyn Treanor
Tel: +1.781.565.8926
Email: ckeating@microsoft.com

SOURCE Nuance Communications, Inc.

Selecting a region changes the language and/or content on Nuance.com

Americas

Europe

Asia Pacific

These cookies are necessary for the website to function and cannot be switched off in our systems. They are usually only set in response to actions made by you which amount to a request for services, such as setting your privacy preferences, logging in or filling in forms.    You can set your browser to block or alert you about these cookies, but some parts of the site will not then work. These cookies do not store any personally identifiable information.

These cookies allow us to count visits and traffic sources so we can measure and improve the performance of our site. They help us to know which pages are the most and least popular and see how visitors move around the site.    All information these cookies collect is aggregated and therefore anonymous. If you do not allow these cookies we will not know when you have visited our site, and will not be able to monitor its performance.

These cookies enable the website to provide enhanced functionality and personalisation. They may be set by us or by third party providers whose services we have added to our pages.    If you do not allow these cookies then some or all of these services may not function properly.

These cookies may be set through our site by our advertising partners. They may be used by those companies to build a profile of your interests and show you relevant adverts on other sites.    They do not store directly personal information, but are based on uniquely identifying your browser and internet device. If you do not allow these cookies, you will experience less targeted advertising.

Nuance uses cookies to make our site work, understand how you use our site and to improve your experience. This includes personalizing content on our site. This means we need to process some of yourpersonal information and store information or access information stored on your device. To change your preferences or to learn more, clickCookie Notice.