=== TRANSCRIPT ===

No transcript found.

=== PAGE CONTENT ===

Learning technology

June 15, 2023

Generative artificial intelligence (GAI) isn’t new technology, but it’s suddenly become a hot topic. There are 33x as many LinkedIn posts mentioning topics like generative AI and GPT than there were one year ago.

Companies have been incorporating AI into their technology products for decades, but OpenAI has democratized it for everyone to use in both personal and work applications.

Some speculate that the impact of AI will be similar to the industrial revolution, leaving many to wonder how it will impact their jobs — for better or worse. HR industry analyst Josh Bersin estimates that 8% of jobs will be upgraded and enhanced by AI over time, while additional jobs will be created to harness it.

Learning and development teams will most certainly be transformed by this quickly expanding technology. Embracing GAI now can help you get ahead in the industry.

Platforms like OpenAI’s ChatGPT and DALL-E 2 are already being widely used to draft written and visual content for a variety of use cases — including workplace learning. For example, you can ask ChatGPT: “Produce an outline for a leadership development course” or “Produce a video script for healthcare compliance training.”

Many other technology solutions incorporate GAI into their platforms as well and the race is on for more vendors to do the same.

The rapid rollout out GAI solutions has the potential to cause an enormous disruption in the learning and development space, as GAI can be used for:

As GAI becomes more sophisticated and more GAI tools emerge, potential applications will continue to expand.

Using GAI for a variety of tasks can lead to higher productivity, more creativity, and better decision-making. Microsoft’s Work Trend Index found that 76% of people plan to use AI for administrative tasks, such as finding the right information and answers, summarizing their meetings and action items, and planning their day. Many also plan to use it for analytical (79%) and creative work (73%).

Automating many of your day-to-day tasks can free up your time to create more strategic, engaging learning experiences that produce better business outcomes. 

For example, you could:

Generative AI can have an incredible impact on your organization, though it has some significant challenges that you’ll need to consider before incorporating it into your L&D program.

ChatGPT, for example, openly shares, “While we have safeguards in place, the system may occasionally generate incorrect or misleading information and produce offensive or biased content.” They continue, “Conversations may be reviewed by our AI trainers to improve our systems. Please don’t share any sensitive information in your conversations.” In short, the use of GAI comes with concerns about accuracy, ethics, and confidentiality — and these concerns aren’t exclusive to OpenAI products.

This shouldn’t dissuade you from using GAI, but rather highlights the importance of putting guardrails in place to use it responsibly. Work with key stakeholders within your organization to build guidelines for using GAI responsibly.

Your GAI policy might include:

Generative AI is quickly gaining traction, with 43% of professionals already using it in some capacity at work. Adoption is only going to grow as GAI is incorporated into more of the tools people utilize in their day-to-day workflows.

Embracing GAI now can help you learn to harness this technology to build a stronger L&D function that helps you future-proof your workforce. In our rapidly evolving world of work, staying on top of these emerging trends can be career-changing.

Topics: Artificial intelligence Learning technology Leadership and management Talent leadership

Related articles

Impact of learning

Jess Almlie

Mar 11, 2025

Talent leadership

Johnny Campbell

Mar 6, 2025

Upskilling and reskilling

Dan Brodnitz

Mar 5, 2025

Sourcing

With global shortages of nurses and physicians, it’s tougher than ever to source healthcare professionals. Here are five tips on how to do it effectively.

Laura Hilgers

Feb 20, 2025

Career development

Employers who focus on employees’ careers have a powerful edge in closing skills gaps and remaining competitive, says the new Workplace Learning Report.

Stephanie Conway

Feb 12, 2025

Data insights

LinkedIn data shows that candidates are still prioritizing compensation, work-life balance, and flexible work, but there are surprising differences depending on industry.

Greg Lewis

Feb 3, 2025

Best practices, trends, and can't-miss stories from the Talent Blog